Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricard Lops and
today I'm Jabaakler Cajal Moran. He's a visiting fellow
at the, at the London School of Economics and
Political Science, and he runs the popular YouTube channel
on learning economics. And today we're talking about his
book Why We're Getting Poor Realist's Guide to the
Economy and how we can fix it. So, Doctor
Moran, welcome to the show. I've been a very
big fan of your channel, so it's an honor
to everyone.
Thanks so much. It's an honor to be here.
OK, so, I mean, we're going to get into
what you mean by getting poorer in the title
of your book through the course of our conversation
today. But you start the book by talking about
the 2007, 2009 financial crisis and sort of its
aftermath. So why was it such an important historical
event?
I'd grown up during a period of relative prosperity
in the UK. We, it was the new Labour
era and you know, it's not like there were
no problems, but there was a boom, right, and
uh Gordon Brown, the Chancellor and then Prime Minister,
was always saying there's no return to boom and
bust. So there was just this feeling that, you
know, things were getting better, they were getting better
for the average person, and there was inequality and
there were, you know, concerns like climate change and
so on, and there was the Iraq war, of
course, but. I think there was a general optimism,
um, and there were, there were things like investment
in social services that New Labour made. So it
just felt like I hadn't thought about the economy
at all, and that's partly because I was like
12, so fair enough. But also, it just wasn't
a problem, right, and then all of a sudden
in 2007 when I was 16 and I first
started studying economics coincidentally, it was a big problem.
It was a massive problem. All of a sudden
the economy was collapsing, people were talking about, you
know. Uh, CASH machines are gonna stop, stop spitting
cash out, and uh there was just this real
sense of dread and. That was, that was, um.
It it was it it came as a surprise
to everybody, right? It, it was, nobody really saw
it coming. The politicians didn't see it coming, but
it seemed like economists hadn't seen it coming either.
And so I was thinking, well, OK, it seemed
like things were going relatively well, then all of
a sudden we have this massive crash. Nobody really
understands what happened, nobody foresaw it. Uh, IT seems
like economics might be a pretty important subject, right?
It might be a good thing that I've just
started to study this subject at high school. So
that was extremely formative for me. It convinced me
not just cos I had reasons for studying economics
just that I found it interesting. I thought there
was, you know, er, it was a fascinating subject
in itself, but this added like a sort of
a a political reason to study it really, like
it gave um renewed validation for my decision to
study it.
And of course, talking about its aftermath, many governments
across the world in response to it implemented austerity
measures. I mean, what do you make of austerity?
Does it work in any way?
I think it's a terrible idea. I think that
it's almost never works. I can imagine a situation
where the state is too bloated in certain countries
and if you're going through an economic boom, then
you might have some room to trim the fat,
but that's certainly not the situation. I mean. If
you're talking about Keynesian economics, where you've got like
countercyclical fiscal policy, right, where you invest in a,
in a downturn and you you push the economy
out of that slump, um, and then you look
at maybe making some cuts when you're back in
the boom. Uh, AND this was kind of what
Labour, uh, were doing. I don't want to sound
like a Labour stan, um, but that's what they
were doing before the coalition took office and, and
the economy was growing and public and the deficit
was shrinking. And uh then, then we decided on
this extremely harsh set of austerity measures. Now, ostensibly
the idea was that it would shrink the deficit.
It turns out it actually didn't really do that
because it's kind of self-defeating, right? It's a false
economy. You take money out of the economy, you
stop investing in the things that really matter to
people, public services, er, local services, health and education.
That's, that's not good for anyone, that's not a
solid foundation for a, for a thriving economy. So
this is why they missed their, their deficit targets.
So they thought that they'd, uh, we'd be in
the black by 2015. When that rolled around, I
think the deficit was still like over 4% of
GDP and it took until 2019 to get, to
get to like a balanced budget. So. In the
meantime, we had much lower growth, uh, you know,
you expect to recover in a sort of V
shape, typically after a recession. That wasn't, it was,
you know, it was more of a sort of
L shape. It was a really slow recovery. You
had the hollowing out of public services of a
lot of physical and social infrastructure across the country.
You had things like Wages stagnating, especially for the
poorest, for public sector workers, they had a pay
freeze for like a decade or more. It's only
recently that they've actually had a substantial raise some,
you know, doctors and nurses and teachers and so
on. So you really just had this economic stagnation
since then and it's really interesting cos the financial
crisis was. Clearly always going to be a terrible
thing, and you know, there was no avoiding it
once the once the sort of uh the seeds
were sown for for things to collapse. But the
way we reacted to it is really what I
think has caused um our current malaise, it's what's
caused the problems that we have now, and that
was primarily. Austerity, um, and even, I mean we
can get into this, I don't want to skip
ahead too much, but even things like Brexit, right,
there's evidence that the areas that were more exposed
to austerity were more likely to vote leave, right,
and then Brexit added further to our cost of,
uh, cost of living, it, you know, was even
worse for the economy, and we've just been in
this downward spiral, right, just lurching from thing to
thing, and this is before I even mentioned the
pandemic.
Yeah, and we're certainly get, uh, going to get
into some of the consequences that that we are
still experiencing right now, uh, some of the consequences
of, of the economic crisis back in 2007, 2009.
But, uh, I mean, we talk a lot about
the economy, the economy, the economy, uh, and we're
going to do that also today a lot. So
what is the economy?
It's a really good question. What, what is the
economy? I think the economy is. Fundamentally it's not,
it's not tangible, right, it's an idea, but I
think when people talk about the economy, um, they're
talking about a kind of sphere that is separated
from politics and society, right? They're talking about this
sphere where money rules, where there's, you know, competition,
where things um sort of sustain in a, in
a spiral and. Through through competition, through private enterprise,
it creates kind of overall productivity gains, overall growth,
and it just seems to be to have a
mind of its own, the economy, right, so people
say like, oh this will be good for the
economy, this will be bad for the economy, and
there's this idea that there are like rules to
how the economy functions. If you pass this regulation,
this is gonna, you know, uh be good for
the economy if you pass that regulation, it's gonna
be bad for the economy, and it's something which
is. Relatively modern. Now I think when most people
say the economy they probably mean GDP. They probably
mean like GDP growth, right, that, that is, that
is generally what people have in mind, so they're
talking about whether growth is going to be higher
or lower, and that's something that like the current
government has committed to. But I also think that
it's a little bit more complicated than that because.
You know, the Tories, they, they were talking about
the deficit, they were talking about the public debt
and deficit as the economy, right, and sometimes in
the cost of living crisis, people would be like,
you know, oh, the economy, the economy's gone wrong,
right, uh because we've got inflation. So there's, there's
lots of different metrics, but above all, I think
it's something that is, people perceive as separate and
people perceive as quite hard to understand, uh, operating
with rules that we, you know, can't necessarily fathom.
And that's, yeah, that, that, that's basically something which
I think is relatively recent. I think we only
really started to talk about it in the 20th
century. And then there's this question of whether, you
know, is how separate is the economy, um, is
it defined by GDP? Is there another way to
think about all this?
Mhm. Yes, and we're going to get into the
topic of GDP later on, but I, I mean,
talking about wealth, how is wealth created? Where does
wealth come from?
00 God, yeah, I mean, where does wealth come
from, right? I think, look, I don't think anybody
has a really good answer to this question. I
think all you can say is that. It's some
very complicated combination of um nature, you know, uh,
natural resources, even, you know, the sun um you
you can say that it's labor, for sure, labor,
you know, you have to work to produce output
or goods and services and um also, you know,
capital like machines, um that increase productivity and. Much
more ethereal things like, you know, um, knowledge and
skills, arguably that they could be considered one of
the most important things for wealth creation. I don't
think anybody has a, a really, really good answer
to this question. I think almost every explanation that
you get ends up saying, well, you know, we,
we say, we say it's these measurable things and
then there's like a huge unmeasurable bit. There's just
like the gap between the measurable things and like
usually GDP right, it's like, where does, where does
that come from? I think we, we do struggle
to truly truly know, but. What the, what, what's
for sure, I think, is that the um. The
process of the economy becoming a separate sphere that
we just, we just spoke about, that is what
has given rise to the massive material standard of
living we have today, one way or another, right,
and through that process of like increased, increased productivity,
you get. Massive wealth creation and modern living standards
on average. I, I wish I had, if I
had the answer to what creates wealth, you know,
I, I'd be, I might be rich, but like
I, I, I don't really, it's, it's still quite
mysterious, but I think really you have to look
at like the birth of the economy and the
birth of capitalism to, to try and understand what
gives rise to modern living standards.
Mhm. Yes, and I mean, in a bit, we're
going to get into billionaires. It's something that you
also talk about in your book, but do you
think that we need the capitalist class in general?
I mean, are those who were in a lot
of money necessary engines of investment and wealth creation
as some people would argue, or are they just
extracting wealth from the rest of us?
That is the question, isn't it? And certainly the
capitalist class, the emergence of capitalism does see what
Marx famously called the MCM prime circuit, where you
know you invest money in, you get commodities C
for sale on the market, and then you get
M which is hopefully higher, higher than M, right,
and then you can reinvest that and you get,
that's exactly the self-sustaining cycle we're talking about. So
that forces up material living standards over the long
term and on average, of course that glosses over
a lot of what goes on under the surface
there, it's not all good, uh, for sure. Um,
SO that's, that's the role of capitalism historically, right?
That, that's the role of the capitalist class historically,
and it's something that we, we only really saw
emerge in the English countryside in, in like, you
know, 16th, 17th century. It's historically unique. Whether it
was necessary um for industrialization, I'm not sure. My
bottom line is that it's happened and I think
that. For better or for worse, it's left us
the globe. As a capitalist economy with a very
high average material standard of living, what I would
argue is that now increasingly it seems that the
the capitalist class are extracting wealth more and more,
and you see things like, you know, tech billionaires,
you just mentioned, right, you see their platforms where
people have to pay their platforms basically to have
a presence online. Yanis Varoufakis has talked about this.
Um, YOU see things like the, the overt corruption
of politics, right, by, by this class, and I
think clearly once you get to a certain material
standard of living and also a standard of like
education. And awareness, I think you want, you want
to be looking at systems where you can, you
can move away from capitalism as we know it
and where people like the workers, er consumers, er
local communities can have more control over the production
process and. Pursue other aims than just, you know,
profit and and growth and efficiency.
But do you, do you think we can say
that the, the economy has been organized to favor
the capitalists?
I think so, yeah, I think you've seen a
number of policy changes recently. I mean, there's. Probably
the, the primary example which sticks in my mind
for obvious reasons now is like how we've dealt
with monopolies and these tech monopolies, because antitrust law,
which is supposed to address monopolies, has just not
been concerned with what these people have been doing
really. The antitrust has been saying if the prices
are low, then there's no problem, there's no monopoly,
right, because monopolies raise prices. So if they're not
raising prices, why complain? What that misses is that
these people generally build what amount to economic empires,
right, so take Amazon. Amazon, like very low prices,
everyone can agree that Amazon provides a wide variety
of products at very low prices and the astonishing
level of convenience. What they don't see is quite
how much control Amazon has over the industry, over,
you know, online, um, and marketing services, you have
to use them for that. If you're gonna sell
anything online, you'll probably encounter Amazon at some point.
Their logistics network, their incredible global logistics network, right,
even things like credit facilities, and they can just
squeeze out any competitors, and really there are no
competitors to Amazon, right, and they have, they have
a long history of, of squeezing out competitors. Anyone
who sort of rears their, their ugly head will
be, will be cut down and and er pushed
out. So. That for me is like a policy
failure, and it's allowing these companies to grow way
too big uh in their own industries and then
allowing as well, on top of everything I just
said, someone like Jeff Bezos, right, can start to
invest in other industries entirely. So his enormous wealth
gives him power over the media. He bought the
Washington Post and he sends Katy Perry to space
for no reason, you know what I mean, it's
just like. If they can do everything, right, or
anything I should say, and then it seems like
increasing areas of not just our economy but like
our lives, right? You're talking about the media, you're
talking about space exploration, you know, you're talking about
all these things, they're just dominated by billionaires and
I just don't think that's a good thing in
any way, shape or form.
So in exploring the topic of how we could
organize our economy in different ways in your book,
you talk about the example of football clubs in
Germany. So tell us about that and how they
illustrate the ways we could do things differently.
Germany's a really interesting case study because I, I
really like Germany because it's real. It exists and
it's really interesting because in some of the reviews
of my book I've seen. In places like maybe
the Financial Times, which were obviously a bit more,
you know, orthodox, um, I, I get the, oh,
you know, you're you're unrealistic, a bit optimistic, a
bit utopian with your solutions. And I'm just thinking
like Germany, it's just like, it's just across, it's
just across like the way, it's just over in
Europe. It's ridiculous like for people to say that's
utopian and what they do. Right, is that they,
they just have much more control over their industries,
right, and that can come in numerous forms. So
with football, which you mentioned, they have the 50+1
rule, which means that the fans own the football
clubs, uh, a major, a majority stake in the
football clubs, and they're not thought of really as
consumers as we are. And the result is that
German football. You know, it's very high quality, uh,
it's ticket prices are lower, it's much more in
touch with local communities. Uh, THERE'S a really good
atmosphere at these, these German games, right? And yeah,
it, it's just much more holistically run, you know,
in the interests of, of the population, in the
interests of Germans. Now you contrast that with the
premier Premiership, right? Now the Premiership is is amazing.
In the UK it is, it is probably the
best football in the world, maybe I'm just saying
that because I'm, I'm English, but uh, but it's
probably true, it's it is probably true, right, and
that and that's, look, this is, this is, this
is capitalism, right, like there's so much investment, there's
so much money in it, yeah, you've got incredible
teams there, absolutely, and the standard of football I
think is better than than Germany, but then you
have to ask at what cost, right, because now.
Communities who live close to stadiums have been priced
out, you've got an increasing use of like executive
boxes, clubs are just much less connected to, to
their communities, and this is, and this is the
thing, right? Football's gone from being somewhere where, you
know, people could gather and congregate and even people,
you know, there were political gatherings after football matches
in the past. It's just not really, it's just
not really possible anymore. So I think we've kind
of sacrificed that on, on the altar of efficiency
because the, the Premier League is a very, very
capitalist league. And it's great for the, for the
football at times, but there are, there are I
think long term costs to the country that aren't
considered, and Germany just manages those different things much
better while still boasting excellent football.
Yeah. By the way, for people who do not
follow the Bundesliga, Bayern Munich just got, uh, a
new title yesterday. They are champions of Germany and
Harry Kane finally got his, the first title ever
in his career. So,
yeah, yeah, he deserves that. Yeah. I mean, Bayern
Munich do win almost every season. I do have
that's that's why I was saying, but they didn't
win last season,
so yeah, yeah, yeah, it was, yeah, yeah, yeah.
So, but I mean, this is something that we
were confronted with during the pande during the COVID-19
pandemic. Who really makes the economy? I mean, who
is essential for the economy.
The mystery of wealth creation, I think is, like
I said, still a mystery, right? I, I don't
know if energy creates wealth, if labor creates wealth,
if human capital and skills and knowledge create wealth,
or if it's just some messy combination of all
of them. What we can say, I like to
stick to what we can say, right? In the
pandemic, it became very clear who we truly depend
on. And I think that that is, those are
the workers who produce things that we need that
are fundamental to our standard of living. Now you
can talk about obvious things like food and water,
shelter and clothing. I do think there are things
like health and education, obviously health especially in the
pandemic, even things like entertainment, you know, um, people
wanted streaming services to continue during the pandemic, obviously.
You know, 100,000 years ago we didn't have those,
and, uh, you know, even, even 20 years ago
really, we didn't have them. So, but with the
need for entertainment is, is fundamental as well, and
that's, that's how we deliver that now. So there
are all these needs and what really struck me
during the pandemic was how quickly everybody, the politicians,
The population, right, and you know, economists and analysts,
they were like, oh yeah, the essential workers, right,
we'll just keep the essential workers on. Not, not
like, not like hedge fund managers, not people who
work in marketing, not academics or YouTubers, right? Like
we're talking about like the bus drivers, the farmers,
the nurses, and everybody just knew like who it
was. And it just really struck me everyone, it
wasn't. Like it wasn't like, oh no, who are
the essential workers, we're gonna have to do loads
of detailed analysis and try and figure that out.
No, everybody fucking knows like who, who keeps, who
keeps us uh you know, living and thriving. Everybody
knew that. Um AND it was just really funny
to me because that really cut through these sometimes
abstract debates about wealth creation and things like, you
know, who gets paid more, who deserves to get
paid more. What's really concerning to me. As well,
is that, you know, essential workers on the whole
tend to get paid less. I think there was
this review in the US that looked at the
pay of essential workers and it's about 15% less
than the average worker, and I think if you
take doctors out of that, doctors are in the
rare position of being an essential worker and being
paid quite well. If you take doctors out of
that, the gap's even bigger. You know, how much
do bus drivers get paid compared to investment bankers,
the gap's massive. Uh, AND that just really worries
me because one thing. Again, you know, I saw
a review of my book. I, I'm using this
as a platform to vent about reviews of my
book I didn't like, uh, but I, I saw
a review of my book that was say that
was. Acted like I was arguing that everything other
than essential workers is completely unnecessary and you know,
we shouldn't have any banking sector or anything. No,
I wasn't saying that. What I'm saying is, why
do we know who the essential workers are, and
they're worst paid, worst treated, work longer hours than
everybody else? How can we recognize that, that those
are the people who are fundamental for human society
and then treat, basically treat them like shit and
pay them nothing and and do that. You know,
during the pandemic, and then go and then um
what, recognize them during the pandemic, and then just
go back to the way it was before. It
it's just completely outrageous, and for me that's really,
that's just really telling and it. Is a much
more simple idea than, you know, these debates about
wealth creation which I think are really unsolved, because
I think almost anybody would find it hard to
justify, you know, why we can do that one
minute, say those are the essential workers, it's simple,
we know who they are, we depend on them,
and then the next minute just. Pay them absolutely
nothing.
Yeah, so going back to the topic of billionaires
just for a minute, what should we make of
them? I mean, are they bad for the economy?
What kinds of impact do they have on the
economy, politics, and society?
The way I think about billionaires is less as
really rich people who have nice things, although they
are that too. It's more as people who have
a lot of power and control over the economy,
people who are able to exert control over their
own industries, and you can see this. From how
they operate in their own industries, right, from, from
the start, someone like Jeff Bezos, he wanted to
corner the market. He has always exerted a lot
of control over his workers. Amazon workers are monitored
like like nobody's business. It's a quite a dystopian
uh picture in in any, any Amazon warehouse. Um,
SO they exert control over their own industries, but
then they reach, reach out into other areas, and
they just want to have influence and power and
control. And their money enables them to do that
and their money in combination with, you know, current
competition laws where mergers and acquisitions are often uh
allowed and and justified. This just makes them economic
kings, right? It gives them so much power, and
I contrast millionaires with billionaires, right, so um well
I contrast billionaires with millionaires I should say. Uh
SO millionaires, you know, being a millionaire is great.
I'd love to be a millionaire, you know, you,
you'd have a nice house, um, you'd have plenty
of nice things, you'd be comfortable, but. You don't
really influence politics, you don't you influence your own
world, that's great for your own world, but at
this stage you're nowhere near the level of power
that a billionaire's gonna have, right? And this is,
this is the difference, because a billionaire can just
summon a whole army of people, a whole bunch
of resources, and just be like, I'm going to
engage in this massive project. It could be anything,
it could be buying Twitter like Elon Musk did,
or it could be, uh, you know, going to
space, or it could be, um, you know, trying
to build a. Uh, NETWORK of tunnels under Las
Vegas, which ends up not really working, but it
could be anything, right, they just have almost unlimited
influence, and that is really what distinguishes like a,
a millionaire from a billionaire in in my head.
And why have billionaires grown so much in number
over the past few decades? Maybe that also speaks
to the rising levels of inequality that we've seen
not only in particular countries but also on a
more global scale. I mean, why has that happened?
We've certainly reduced taxes on, on the very richest.
I mean that, that much is clear, right, they
were reduced from about 80%, top marginal tax rate
in the 80s, and now they're down to somewhere
between 40 and 50%, um, depending on where you
are. So that, that's a pretty straightforward way that
the richest have increased their, their um their lot.
But the thing again with billionaires, it's funny, isn't
it, because it's wealth, um not income. And I
think, you know, I've spoken to some of the,
the changes in competition policy and antitrust policy, how
big companies are allowed to become, uh, I think
that's fed into it as well. Um I also
think that especially Anglo-American economies are very financialized, so
a lot of things run through the stock market
now. I think a lot of things are, you
know, the, the financing is done largely through the
stock market and through like venture capital, and so
you get this balance sheet wealth, right, you get
that and you can use that as like collateral
if you want to do something like by Twitter.
So I think there is like the fact that
we don't tax them is probably front and center,
that's like the number one thing I would say,
we need to tax them, but I do think
the amount of leeway that. They have in running
their industries and also the role of like an
increasingly financialized economy, those things also come into it.
Do you think it is possible for anyone to
become a billionaire without exploiting other people and the
system itself?
I mean, I'm a big Taylor Swift fan, so
I do. I do feel obliged to defend her
as someone who, I mean she she's the first.
Uh, MUSICIAN to make, uh, to become a billionaire
solely from like music, she doesn't sell any merchandise,
but you, and, and yeah, I don't wanna stand
for her too much. Uh, GENERALLY speaking, her employees
don't complain about her as well, they say she's
actually a really good boss, but can you, I
mean, I don't know, even then you've got things
like intellectual property right, and, and intellectual property. Um,
IS something which I completely understand the rationale for
it. It's like, you know, I'm a creator, creators
should have rights over what they do, they should
be able to make money from what they do,
but it is very much a winner take all
system and once you get big enough, you have
a lot of money accruing to the biggest. You
can see this in any creative endeavor, music. It's
winner take all, Taylor Swift's a billionaire, most musicians
don't make anything. Uh, IT'S like Twitch, Twitch streamers,
the biggest Twitch streamers like Hassan, make millions. Most
Twitch, I I stream on Twitch. I, I get
paid like 100 pounds a year, uh, from my
Twitch streams, right? It's like, I don't get anything
from it. So I do think we've got this
dynamic of this winner take all market, um. And
we need to really rethink how that works so
that there's more democratic payment, uh a democratic distribution
of payments to people. And I, to answer your
question, I think exploited is a contentious word, but
I, I basically, I do think that every billionaire
is a policy failure, and if someone is a
billionaire, we need to be looking at a way
that to design our systems to. Benefit the average
person more and you know take resources from the
billionaire and and and give them to the, you
know, the average musician. The average musician should make
more money and Taylor Swift should make less. And
she's like the best possible example. This is before
I even get into like, you know, the really
truly horrible billionaires.
Yeah, uh, another thing that we can associate with
billionaires is billionaire philanthropy. I mean, do you think
it really helps people? What kinds of impact does
it have on society?
You know, it's, it's a really tough argument to
make. I think someone like Mr. Beast is a
really good example. So I don't talk about him
in the book, but he is a good example
because most people, when they see a Mr. Beast
thumbnail that's like, I, you know, cured blindness for
1000 children, uh, they're like, that looks good. And
you're like, yeah, it does, that's kind of difficult
to argue with, right? So uh but there's a
really there's a complexity underneath that. Now the question
is really not whether we should be curing blindness
in children, which we obviously should, it's whether that
should be channeled through people like Mr. Beast and
through people like Bill Gates, who's made a lot
of philanthropic efforts. And I think the problem here.
Right, is that OK, they will do plenty of
good things, but the moment that clashes with their
bottom line, the moment that clashes with their image
that they want to project, right, then what's gonna
come first? Of course it's gonna be their bottom
line. Now Mr. Beast has been the subject of
a lot of controversy. Uh, A number of things,
how he treats his employees, how he makes his
videos, whether they're really truthful, does, did he actually
cure blindness for 1000 children? Sometimes when you get
into the nitty gritty, it's a little bit murky,
nobody's really holding him accountable because it's a private
business. Same with the Gates Foundation, you know, they've
done things like made vaccines widely available, uh, like
for things like polio, great. That's great, right, but
then they do shy away from things which are
less measurable. So the thing about, uh, curing polio
with vaccines is that you can be like, OK,
we've done, you know, a million people this year,
and that's like, that looks good, that's like, you
know, KPI that's like a metric, right? But I,
they had this kind of clash with some researchers
and with the Indian government. The Indian government was
saying we need better water systems, better sewage systems,
because diarrhea's a bigger problem than polio. And the
Gates Foundation were like, oh, that seems a bit,
you know, a bit too amorphous, I don't think,
you know, it's not as good a a deliverable
for, for our sort of image. And so it
ended up, they ended up neglecting that, right? So
these decisions that should be fundamentally democratic, yes, we
should be putting resources. Into these things, as Bill
Gates and Mr. Beast both do to some extent,
maybe we should be putting more resources in, but
they should be more democratic decisions, and that that's
really the problem, but again, I want to underscore,
I find this argument very hard to make to
ordinary people because they are just like. 1000 blind
children, what are you, you know, what's your problem?
That sounds good, so yeah, I'd like, I'd like
to think I'd like to. Discuss with people and
think about how best to make that argument in
a concise form.
Yeah, isn't it also the case that when we're
talking about philanthropy, one thing that it usually does
not address is systemic change because, for example, of
course, we could give out money for uh uh
nets in Africa to fight back against malaria transmission
and stuff like that. But at the end of
the day, we're not doing something that will ever
see. Systemic impact on the politics or the economy
of, I don't know, Angola, Mozambique and other places
like that. So, and perhaps in the long term,
it doesn't it doesn't have that big of an
impact as it could have if we had more
of a systemic approach to uh change, I guess.
Absolutely and you know they're not gonna. Bill Gates
might want to uh deliver malaria nets, right, in,
in Angola. um WHAT he's not gonna say is
I'm going to relax my intellectual property claims in
Angola, right, which would not only potentially open up
the space for, for um. Health gains, but also
more generally might release the grip that like Microsoft
has on like local companies, right, and and the
ability for Angola to grow and and and you
know, create its own solutions and things like that,
so absolutely, yeah, it does come at the expense
of systemic change.
So I want to ask you now a little
bit about social mobility. Of course, I guess that
uh for us to be more precise, we would
have to go on a country by country basis,
but you, you are from the UK. Talk, tell
us about the UK in particular, perhaps the US
as well. What do we know about social mobility
nowadays? Is it good? Is it bad?
The thing about social mobility in the UK is
that the there there is some churn, I think,
in the middle class. I think if you're born
lower middle class, you can probably end up upper
middle class and vice versa. But I think if
you're born poor and or very poor, your chances
of getting out are are pretty low. They're pretty
low, and similarly, if you're born rich. Your chances
of falling, falling from grace are almost zero, right?
So we do have a very entrenched class system
in the UK and although there's some income mobility,
I, it never really truly changes and there's this
PhD thesis by um. Um, I forget his name,
I'm sorry, but there was, uh, he was looking
at long run social mobility in the UK. So
what he means by long run is not, um,
generation to generation. COS what's really interesting is that
sometimes you get a bit of movement from generation
to generation, you know, I might do better than
my dad or the, but from, from across a
long, a lot of generations, people almost always snap
back to their long term position. Right, so yeah,
I. I might like, uh, if I'm like relatively
rich, maybe I'm, you know, uh, a wealthy heir,
a careless heir, and I spend all my money.
But then the chances are my kids are gonna
be back up, back up in that top class,
right? And this is really interesting cos I just
think that. The class system, yeah, it's, it's not,
I mean we still have the royal family, right,
I think of it, they're like the apex of
it, right, we still have the royal family here.
I don't think the class system in the UK
is in danger of disappearing anytime soon. I think
that, you know, social mobility over the long term,
especially and with wealth is pre is pretty limited.
But what is behind the lack uh or low
social mobility? What causes it? What are the main
barriers to social mobility?
I think there are a lot of factors that
um feed into this. So you've got like starting
wealth, right, like your starting wealth stat. THAT'S like,
that's pretty big. If you've got, if you inherit
like a house outright, and that's not even to
say that you're super rich, like I just mean
a house, a normal house, right, then. Then you're
just, your chances of doing well are so much
higher, right, you've got that base, you've reduced your
outgoings, right, you've just got like safety to experiment
and try different things, start a business, start a
risky job, get education, all of those types of
things, right? If you've got that support network or
just a strong family that like can can um
give you money if you need it or allow
you to stay with them. THOSE things can make
a a really, really big difference. And again, you
take it to extremes. The amount of wealth that
that you know, people who go to boarding schools
and and all of that in the UK have,
it's just unfathomable, the amount of wealth they have,
right? And there's just no chance that they can
fail, they fail upwards. Um, NOW there's also the
question of like social connections, right, I think this
is really, really big in the UK. Um, THE
journalist Simon Cooper wrote this book called Choms, um,
which is like the sort of the group of
friends who run Bri run Britain, and he said,
you know, he said to me that it's astonishing
who these people can get on the phone. They
can have politicians on the phone, they can have
CEOs on the phone, right, they can have policymakers
on the phone, they can have diplomats from different
countries on the phone, right? And the opportunities that
you have when you can do that, on top
of the fact that you're already really wealthy. You'll
just always have job offers, and not just job
offers, but lucrative job offers, right? VERSUS if you
look at the other end, what are sometimes called
the precariat, people with basically no assets, but no
social connections, they can't, you know, people who are
working maybe as cleaners, they don't have anyone they
can phone and be like, you know, can you,
can you give me a job, let alone can
you give me a job that pays a million
pounds a year. So I think you've got, yeah,
things like the starting wealth and you've got social
connections, you've also got discrimination. Which is a really
big one. Now discrimination operates on a number of
different dimensions, including class, but essentially, if you're, you
know, the posher you are, the whiter you are,
the more male you are, the more able-bodied you
are and the straighter you are, I think the
more likely you are to get that call back
from a, from a job interview that you attend,
the more likely you are to get to be
selected as a tenant for housing. There's so much
evidence for this that discrimination takes place on all
these fronts, so. It is, it's a very complex
picture, but the bottom line is that. People are
playing on different difficulty settings, right? Like if you're
born, if you go to Eton, you're playing on,
on very easy mode, right, and if you're born,
you know, into a, a working class family with,
with short term, um, poorly paid jobs, maybe working
two jobs, then you're playing on a very difficult
difficulty setting and and everything is just harder.
But uh but let's say that we have a
country with high social mobility, which is good, but
also high inequality. Isn't that a problem? Isn't that
combination a problem?
Have you got high social mobility but still high
inequality? I think, I think so, yeah, I think
there are, um, I mean. I will say that
usually higher inequality means lower social mobility cos it
just, there's more barriers created by the rich, but
I, I'll take your question as given. um, THERE
are problems created by inequality, right? And there's this
research uh done on like socioeconomic status and health
and on crime. Uh, THIS is pretty well known
by researchers in the kind of epidemiology, public health
space, and by crime researchers, inequality leads to these
worst social outcomes. And there's a bunch of famous
studies done. Um, ONE of my favorite ones was
they studied nuns. So if you imagine becoming a
nun, you go, you all, um. Go and live
at this nunnery, you live the most homogenous lifestyle
you can imagine, right? You're literally all in the
same place doing the same thing, eating the same
thing, acting the same way among the same people,
right? But the nuns socioeconomic status going in was
a predictor of their mortality, of their eventual life
expectancy. So that it just, that kind of gradient.
Makes a big impact on everybody and there's some
evidence as well, so Kate Pickett and Richard Wilkinson
have talked about this in the inner level. There's
some evidence that it hurts everybody, right? So like,
even if you're rich, um, but you're in a
less equal country, your life expectancy is lower than
if you're rich in a more equal country. Right,
so there's, there's, there's just, uh, inequality gets under
everybody's skin, it leads to a divided society, it
leads to more status anxiety. That's like the crucial
measure that they look at in the inner level,
uh, just anxiety about where I stand in the
pecking order, that kind of thing. So I think
there are lots of reasons for us to want
more equality in general, even if we have high
social mobility, even if other outcomes are going relatively
well. It's something that's worth pursuing in itself.
Since we're talking about inequality now, what are the
social consequences of inequality because we hear from certain
people like, for example, Steven Pinker, he argues in
the in the Enlightenment now that he, he has
a sort of a chapter on inequality and he
argues that if people have a positive perception of
Quality that is, if they think that people who
earn more or have more money deserve it because
they might work more or they might do more
things than other people, then inequality is not a
problem. But even if people have a positive perception
of inequality, uh, can't it still have, uh, bad
social consequences?
There's definitely a truth in what Pinker is saying,
right? I mean, we all understand that the 2008
financial crisis, people were really angry at bankers, right?
And why? Was it just because they were earning
more? No, because people were less angry at them
before the crisis, right, where when the financial sector
hadn't imploded, they were more angry with them. After
they imploded the financial sector and the economy, and
then continued to get paid loads, after being bailed
out directly by the government and the central banks,
and it's like people are like, well you're just,
you know, this is socialism for the rich. It's
ridiculous, it's unjust, it's unfair. So I do understand
that, but I don't know why, I mean I
do know why Steven Pinker argues this because he
has to spin everything as improving, and he knows
that inequality has been getting worse, so he has
to say it's not a problem. Now this contradicts
some of his earlier work, it must be said,
but anyway. There's a lot of evidence, and Pinker's
argument there is based on lab experiments, by the
way, there's a lot of evidence from like actual
data. If you look at subjective well-being and happiness
data, inequality just impacts people's happiness. Regard everywhere, across
the world, um, the level of inequality in a
country, the level of inequality in a local area.
There's a lot of evidence that they impact subjective
happiness. And so he says specifically, you know, inequality
is not a fundamental component of human well-being. Well,
this is data on well-being and it contradicts him,
so I just, I don't see how he can
sustain that argument. On top of everything else I
just said about health and crime and the socioeconomic
gradient, I think there are so many negative effects
of inequality on people.
Uh, DO you think that higher taxes, particularly on
the rich, could contribute to fixing inequality?
Yeah, definitely, I, I'm, I'm in favor of uh
taxing income, I'm in favor of taxing capital gains
as well, particularly I think that the fact that
capital gains tax is much lower than income tax
is something I don't support. I think if you,
you know, you gain from an er an increase
in the value of an asset, you, you and,
and you realize that you should, you should be
paying tax on it as if it's as if
it's income. And I'm in favor of some kind
of wealth tax. I'm, I'm undecided on, on what
exactly that would look like. I know wealth can
be quite hard to estimate and to tax, but
one suggestion I've seen is that because like I
said earlier, a lot of the rich's wealth these
days is in stocks. Um, AND that's. It's hard
to tax because it's not money, right, it's not
money, but what I've seen is, you know, take
the stocks. You take the stocks and you create
something like a social wealth fund, like Norway, like
Alaska, that pays out to the population every, every
month, every year or whatever, some kind of dividend,
and so you just appropriate the stocks for the
general public. Um, SO yeah, there are, there are,
I, there are countless ways I'd like to tax
the rich more and I think it, it has
two benefits, right? So firstly, it reduces the power
and control that we've been talking about. But secondly,
the money that you get can be used to
help people, right, so you've got a kind of
double whammy there.
Uh, AND what do you think about universal basic
income? I mean, from the experiments that have been
done in several different places across the world, uh,
looking at their results, what do you make of
it? Do you think it has a positive or
it could have a positive impact on people's lives?
I was initially a skeptic of universal basic income,
and that that was mostly because I was worried
that it would be used to replace all public
services, and I think there are people who that's
more, if you go on the more right wing
advocacy, going back to maybe Milton Friedman, uh but
also maybe people like Andrew Yang. Um, AND who,
who I think was pitching it to the right
as like a replacement for, for the state basically
for public services. Uh, I, I don't like that
argument. I don't think it's a replacement for public
education, public health. Those sectors have their own reasons
that you would want to provide them publicly. However,
I think it's a supplement. And I think that
the thing is, right. Before the emergence of capitalism
that we spoke about, before the emergence of the
economy as a separate sphere, people were generally more
connected to the land and to their means of
subsistence. People used to work, but they used to
provide for themselves. So they'd have this like baseline
standard of living, they wouldn't necessarily have to work
for wages in order to earn money to survive.
That was how capitalism established itself in the English
countryside. And so we've been disconnected from our means
of subsistence, and this is when you see people
unable to survive if they, if they can't, if
they can't work in a job. And there are
lots of problems with that. Jobs aren't always available
to people, um. You know, they can be extremely
soul destroying and alienating, right? And it's just a
fundamental human urge, I think, to, to be, to
have like subsistence and to have that baseline insurance.
I think it leaves us all in a state
of like permanent anxiety and uncertainty. So UBI, I
think, now that we have. Capitalism, now that we
have a market economy, now that everything's exchangeable for
money, UBI is, is, is giving, giving that back
to us, right? It's giving that baseline. No, you
will never fall below this standard of living. And
it doesn't have to be a high standard of
living, I would say like, for me, I would
start with like 10 a month in the UK.
That's not loads. 120 a year is not like
that expensive, it's. Completely affordable and it's not like
some luxurious standard of living, but it is just
saying, nobody, nobody is allowed to fall below this,
right, and that level of security, I think, is
absolutely vital as a human need. Now you mentioned
the trials. What has really surprised me about these
trials, cos we've we've experimented with UBI across so
many countries, more in in poorer countries. Uh, I'm,
I believe in, in humanity, and I don't believe
that everybody's just gonna slack if they get UBI.
I think people have an urge to contribute to
society, to better themselves, to invent and create and,
and, and so on. But I have been surprised
by how successful these trials have been. It's incredible
people really don't take time off work, working unless
they're maybe um raising children, mostly mothers, which is,
you know, that is work obviously in itself. There's
there's effects on the local economy, there's no like
inflation, they seem to boost the local economy. People
don't spend all their money on, you know, sin
goods like like cigarettes and so on, which by
the way, they have a right to, but I've
just been surprised like, it really, really works. Uh,
IT doesn't have almost any of the negative effects
that people were worried about. It has a lot
of positive effects, and I think. As well as
being a kind of moral obligation, as I just
outlined, I think it's an economic obligation as well,
I think it's good for the economy. So, there's
no excuse now, especially in poorer countries as well,
like we could solve poverty. Like that, we really
could, right? Like I appreciate there are logistical problems,
but like we, we could solve it just by
rolling out these programs across the world. Nobody in
the world, we have so much wealth in the
world, nobody is allowed to drop below a certain
standard of living. That is one of the policies
I would like to see tomorrow. I, I, again,
there is no excuse for us not doing it.
Uh, BUT in terms of its affordability, because this
is something that many or at least some people
would worry about. I mean, uh, uh, would it
entail any changes to our, for example, taxation system
or something like that? Because, uh, I mean, when
it comes to, you mentioned public services, let's say,
let's Talk for example about disability benefits and employment
benefits. I mean, would those still be there and
would they add to universal basic income or would
universal basic income substitute those sorts of public benefits?
So yeah, that's a really good question. I'm glad
you asked it because it could UBI is a
is a cash payment rights a money payment. It
could feasibly, I don't think it should replace public
services, it could feasibly replace some of the cash
payments out there, right? So I don't think you'd
need unemployment benefits if you have UBI, for instance,
because it is basically that just for everyone all
the time. Disability benefits maybe, you know, people with
disabilities have different needs, um. But I think we
think even like, you know, pensions as a baseline
pension scheme, public pension scheme, right, things like um
grants for students, I think like living money for
students, I think it could replace that. So there
are, you are saving on, on some metrics, you're
replacing them with UBI, which is also less administratively
costly. But you, you'd need to raise taxes. Right,
you'd need, you'd need further progressive taxation. um, AND
I, I haven't done the maths on this in
a while, but like Scott Santenss is, um, have
you, have you ever interviewed Scott Santans on your,
on your, you heard of him? OK, he's he
he's he's really cool, he's like a UBI. He's
on a mission, he's on a mission to get
UBI established. He's really good, but he, he's done
all the calculations and you know, it really is.
It really is completely affordable with some modest tax
increases and replacing a few programs, um, yeah, it
it's, I think it's completely feasible.
OK, so I asked you earlier about Steven Pinker's
views on inequality, and we know that he also
has these more broader view of improvement over the
course of the past few centuries. He also talks
about that in the Better Angels of Our Nature
and other books. Uh, WHAT do you make of
the many ways life has improved for most people,
I guess that would be fair to say, over
the past two centuries.
These are the new optimists, and I think it's
really interesting for me because I made a video
on my channel critiquing Steven Pinker on inequality and
poverty, and I've covered some of that already. So
the new Optimist, there's also Hans Rosling, uh, his
book Factfulness. There are other ones, I think Charles
Kenny Get Better, Matt Ridley, The Rational Optimist. There
are quite a few of these books out there.
Um, I've not read all of them. Uh, BUT
I really think that there, there are a number
of issues with this narrative now. The first thing
to say is that there is this massive growth
in our material standard of living over the past
two centuries, the past few centuries, right? I, I
mean, I started by talking about that. Furthermore, there
are recent gains um in economic gains, you've got
the rise of China, for instance, the most. The
most salient example is the rise of China. Nobody
can deny that the Chinese standard of living has
gone up. Other countries, mostly East Asian, have achieved
similar things. Um, AND there are also, you know,
there are plenty of growing countries, uh, that, that
are doing doing really well now like Rwanda's doing
relatively well, for example, and like Nigeria's grown a
lot. So there are, there are some economic success
stories. In addition, there are success stories along like
the matrix of health and education, things like literacy,
things like vaccines, things like nutrition, I think things
like malnutrition have been combated hugely, right? Now, I
don't really wish to deny any of this, uh,
but my issue is. The narrative attached to it,
right? Um, AND I think Steven Pinker in particular,
Rosling's a bit more nuanced on this, but Steven
Pinker in particular, his idea seems to be, things
are getting better, why is everyone complaining? It must
just be because they don't understand these graphs. Let
me show you 70 graphs. Now, do you feel
better? Uh, AND the answer is no, and he
has to do things like blame cognitive bias and
media bias, which is very weak, is, is very
weak, that stuff, we can talk about it if
you like, but um. I think the fundamental question
for me that I'm asking in in the book
why we're getting poorer, why is it that despite
many of these gains, despite the massive growth of
GDP and some of the great technologies we enjoy,
look at what we're doing this interview on, you
know, despite some of these gains in health and
stuff. Why is it that so many people are
struggling? Why do so many people feel the pinch?
Why is there so much political backlash? And I
think the answer is. For me Yes, we have
a lot of material wealth, but a lot of
our much more fundamental needs, I think have been
sidelined. And a big example here would be housing.
Like, yeah, my grandparents, right, my grandparents couldn't order,
you know, Brazilian, Korean fusion to their door in
half an hour. OK, they couldn't do that, they
couldn't have a a a video call online. Right,
OK. They didn't have access to like all of
the world's information at their fingertips. But what they
could do was afford a house. Um, AND what
they did have was far better local services, far
more access to er sort of social and physical
infrastructure that's declined across England over the past decade
or so. And They, they didn't have to pay
for university, right, so I think there are all
of these things which are very fundamental to people,
seem to have become less available or more costly
or worse run. And we, that's because we haven't
focused on them. We've allowed the economy to grow
as a whole without focusing on these fundamental human
needs. And this goes back to what I was
saying about essential workers because those are the people
who provide these things, right, and yet we don't.
Honor them in in in any sort of way.
We're just happy to say, you know, let the
economy run, let the private sector grow, whoever gets
paid in the private sector, you know, deserves it,
and we're not going to focus on how we
provide for uh human and social needs. That's what's
fallen by the wayside, and I feel like that's
why a lot of people are so dissatisfied because
they don't feel like they're getting richer. You know,
we've had housing costs, we've had the cost of
living crisis, we've had the supply chain crisis, we
have all these things that are hitting people in
their pockets. I mean the the Resolution Foundation in
um earlier this year. They um released a report
showing that in the UK the bottom 40% of
earners have lost out since the pandemic. They're earning
less than they did before the pandemic, and that,
that's gonna go down by 2029, they're gonna be
earning even less than that. Right, so it's like,
yeah, overall GDP is going up and some metrics
are improving, but so many people are struggling and
Pinker and Rosin, neither of them look at things
in enough depth to really capture that in my
opinion.
Right. And let me ask you specifically about poverty.
I mean, usually people, when they talk about poverty
and how capitalism supposedly has been lifting people across
the globe out of poverty. Usually they are referring
to extreme poverty, but uh I mean, as Has
capitalism really been lifting people out of poverty? Has
that really been happening? Because it seems to me
that at least in recent years, a higher number
of people and even in the most developed countries
have been living in poverty, right?
It's a really good question. So it gets, what
is poverty? You get to this fundamental question and
and uh there's no easy answer to that question
because on the one hand you could say, you
know, simply you're starving, right, if you're if you're
starving, you're in poverty. But that but that doesn't
seem like enough because then you've got people who
are maybe not starving, but clearly living in in
really unacceptable conditions. And then you've got things like
social exclusion, some people think of that as, as
like poverty if you're just excluded from participating in
society. Um, SOMEONE who's like homeless might actually, you
know, in London, their, their, their money income would
put them way above the international poverty line, right,
but they're completely cut out of society. So, so
there, there's lots of different ways of, of estimating
poverty. I don't think any of them are entirely
satisfactory. But what Pinker and Rosling and the New
Optimists and our world in data do is they
have this international poverty line, right, and it's like
$2 150 cents a day. Uh, NOW that's very
little. It is worth underscoring how little that is,
it's like, um, less than $1000 a year. Um,
AND I think this is fundamentally flawed. Now there
are a few reasons for that, but one of
them is that it, it creates a lot of
false certainty. Around the data that we have, like
we don't, we don't have that good data on
poverty in poor countries and especially among the poorest
people in poor countries. There's a guy called Morton
Jervin, a poverty researcher has looked at this and
that sometimes the data they're just missing, right? And
then you get this kind of pristine graph that's
like poverty's declined, it's like well how many, for
how many countries is that, is that data actually
not there? I do think it's false certainty, right?
But there is also this question of like, um.
How context dependent poverty is. So I think the
international poverty line puts poverty in um Egypt and
also Turkey at like 1%, right? And scholars from
those countries who work on their countries, they're just
like that's, that's ridiculous. 1% of the, basically none
of the population are in poverty. There are people
scraping by, you know, in Cairo, there are people
who are just like living on the streets. There
are so many people and the, the government puts
their poverty rate at like 30%. For that reason,
and I think this does get to the point
that really, yeah, poverty does just depend on the
society you're in, and I think we need relative
poverty lines that are like defined as a. As
a percentage of the national income, uh because uh
the the bottom line is this, the idea of
needs and the idea of social exclusion, they interact,
right, if you can't think about it like this,
right, you know, imagine going to a job interview
in the UK without clothing that's kind of. Nice
and acceptable to the people in in the UK,
right? You might even need a suit, right, at
least a shirt or something, and you need to
be clean and well kept, you know what I
mean, all of these things. And that's like, yeah,
you have to be at this level, otherwise you're,
there's a, it's like a threshold, right, otherwise. YOU'RE
below it, then you're not, you can't get a
job, you can't get a house, you can't participate
in society. So that threshold is how we should
define poverty, in my opinion. Again, no easy way
to do it, but most governments and and er
researchers have settled on this kind of percentage of
median income or something like that. And if you
look at that country by country, you will find
that poverty, the picture with poverty isn't as rosy
as that, you know, precipitous decline with the international
poverty line, um. And people even in richer countries
like the USA there's poverty, right, whereas the international
poverty line would say there's basically none. No, there
is, of course there is, there's loads of homelessness
in the USA. Don't tell me there's no poverty
there, right? So I think that for me is,
is the fundamental problem here. Now I do want
to underscore this by saying due to such impressive
growth in places like China. There is still a
poverty reduction even using this line, if you use
the Chinese um poverty line, right, you still get
a lot of poverty reduction, right? So it's not
that it's completely invisible, but I just think we're
looking at the the wrong metrics here. And to
understand poverty, you know, you need to go country
by country and even region by region. You know,
it differs based on whether what counting, you know.
If, if you're in a very hot country, you
don't actually need like a house as we would
have one in, in a colder country, right? You
know what I mean it just, it just changes,
it changes over time, it changes across space. And
I just think you need much more depth than
someone like Steven Pinker or or Hans Rosling is
going into with their, with their one graph that
solves everything.
Yeah, and I mean, the $2.15 a day, it,
it sounds really ridiculous to me. I mean, it's
not just that even for people in poorer countries
where maybe, I mean, the cost of living is
not as high as in other more developed countries.
I mean, $2.15 a day is, is still ridiculously
low, but, and I've heard some criticisms from, for
example, some Uh, socialist critics who say that it
should be $5 a day or it should be
even $10 a day and even that is, even
$10 a day, it's just $300 a month, so
it's not really that high. But I, I mean,
it's, isn't this amount uh ridiculous even for poor.
You
know, there was a guy who I think worked
at the statistics office for uh in Kenya. And
the, at the time, this was maybe a couple
of decades ago, the official uh statistics put I
think half of the population below $2.15 right? And
he said, if that's true, half of my half
of my people are dead, right, because actually it
it there's these huge problems with like how we
estimate this, and I actually think that. You're talking
about a process of marketization, right, and again this
goes back to what we've been discussing all, all
through uh this talk, right, of capitalism establishing itself,
things being brought into the market, into the official
economy and. Researchers work hard at this, I don't
want to denigrate anybody who works on this. They
know that there's a problem here, but non-market forms
of subsistence are generally underestimated by this, right? And
so this gets to your point, because it's like,
actually I think the it's not like everybody's been
living on $1 a day or the equivalent for
the whole of human history. Like the guy in
Kenya said, that's ridiculous, they'd be dead. Right, people
need much more than that to subsist, and I
think our measures kind of overestimate the gains from
marketization. So, yeah, I mean $10 a day, Lance
Pritchard, I think said $15 a day. Even then
it's, it's really, it's really not that much money,
right? Um, SO I, I do think it's too
low, uh, but again, I think it, it, it
should be, it's too low. There's your headline, it's
too low, but also it needs to be context
dependent and vary based on country and location and
and other needs as well. You know, if you've
got, like we mentioned disability earlier, if you've got
a disability, your needs are different, right? It's, it
might cost more money, you know, for you to,
I don't know, just have a wheelchair or something,
right, so like, then that's a fundamental need. So
there's so much context dependence here, um, and I
don't think it's easy to say what is happening
to global poverty from a graph.
Right. And the other thing as well is that
even though many times people do not even consider
this is that it is very expensive to be
poor, right?
Yes, yeah, I mean this is, it's, it's uh.
It's a a vicious cycle, right? It's a vicious
cycle being in poverty because we were talking about
mobility, you know, and and this is the, you
know, the sharp end of that, because when you're
in poverty, OK, firstly, let's take a bet, you
can't eat, you you can't eat enough, right? That's
not good for you, that's not good for your
life chances, that's not good for your economic productivity
or anything, it's not good for your health, right?
And that kind of dynamic creates a lot of,
a lot of costs and there's this. There's a
lot of um. There are a lot of researchers
studying the effects of poverty now and the effect
it has on people, it can, you know, everything
from. It can reduce your IQ, right, there's some
famous research on that that shows when people are
impoverished, the same person, when they're poor versus when
they're rich, they're like, they score worse on intelligence
tests, it reduces your time horizon. There's no point
in planning for the future when there may not
be a future, right? You need to work on
them now. Can I pay rent this year, uh,
this, this month, not, you know, what am I,
you know, am I going to invest in a,
in a house, in a mortgage over the next
5 years? You can't think about that, uh, you
don't have the mental bandwidth. And also there's, you
know, directly to what you said, just the richer
you are, the cheaper things are, quite simply, because
a, a good example would be like a, a
phone contract, right? You you would have noticed that
if you get a mobile phone, if you pay
upfront for the handset, it's cheaper overall. Now you,
I, uh, you know, I, I can't afford that,
so I'm paying more over 18 months or whatever,
but there's a lot of things like that and
you know, as you, as you get richer, you
can just invest in nicer things, right, which last
much longer, and then you reduce your expenses and.
There are things like, you know, even as you
get as you get as you get richer, you're
more likely to be given things as well, right,
you're just more likely to have things given to
you for no money at all. So poverty is,
it's a trap, right? It is a trap, it's
a vicious cycle, and lots of people, I feel
in our current analysis believe that the poor are
poor because they're, you know, they're, they're not productive,
um, because they, they don't plan for the future
and all things like that, it's like, no. For
anyone, being in poverty creates that situation, right, being
it's, it's reverse causality, poverty causes those things, right,
it's not that those things cause poverty.
Yeah, and a very interesting example I read once,
I think it was on Red. It was someone
saying that he had a very old car and
he didn't have lots of money. So he had
to keep his old car, but then the car
kept breaking down and every time it broke down,
he had to take it to, uh, the garage
to get fixed and every. Thing like that. So
he was always spending more and more money on
this car just to be able to drive around.
And someone who has more money, who's rich or
even not even that rich, but with a little
bit more money, can just ditch the old car
and buy a new one and avoid all those
expenses.
100%, yeah.
So let me ask you now about the gender
pay gap. I know that you, uh, that you've
done an entire video on the gender pay gap
for your channel and you also write about it
in your book. It's a very interesting topic, not
only because there's, I, I mean, it's interesting in
itself talking about these things, but also because people
from uh both uh from both sides have uh
some compelling arguments, let's say, but What do you
make of it? I mean, first of all, is
it real? And if so, what causes it?
It's a fact that women have, on average, um
lower access to resources than men, right? Women earn
less than men. If you take an average man
and an average woman, right, the woman will earn
less, and I think Matt Breedig did the calculations
where that's like 60%. The average woman earns about
60% of what the average man does as of
maybe 5 years ago, maybe it's pre-pandemic, right? Now,
then there's there's these more nuanced questions. Um, WHAT
about if they're both employed, right, then OK, yeah,
it drops and it's more like 80%. Then there's
like, what if they're both employed in the same
job, then I think it's more like 10%, right?
So I think there is a gender pay gap,
you know, uh uh at all levels. It reduces
once you start controlling for things. Once you start
adjusting for, OK, men and women are working differentially,
they're working different hours, they're working in different jobs,
that's, that's true. Now what you get with this
debate is, I think, quite a fundamental misunderstanding uh
perpetuated by people like Jordan Peterson in his like
infamous debate with Cathy Newman on on Channel 4
where, you know, he, he knew more about it
and so, you know, it seemed like he was
right, but actually. What he was saying basically is
that you should unambiguously control for all these things,
control for as many things as possible. Whether you're
working full time, how many hours you're working, what
your occupation is, um, your personality traits even, are
you, uh, more agreeable, are men less agreeable than
women, that's why they get a pay rise and
so on. I think this really misses that those
very things can be the uh mechanism through which
women are discriminated against, right? So if you have
women are pushed out of jobs that pay better,
lawyers, bankers, what have you, and into jobs that
pay worse, right, like secretarial roles or administrative roles,
or, you know, women being nurses as opposed to
doctors, right? If if you think about those kinds
of things, then discrimination unambiguously does take place along
these metrics. There's a lot of experimental evidence on
it or close to field experiments, um, on this,
as well as lab experiments too. There's so much
evidence that like women are just more likely to
be um. To to be rejected for for these
roles, right? And so then you have to ask,
well, OK, that that's how discrimination is taking place,
so yeah, women work different jobs than men, but
they. Um, AND that's why they earn less, but
that's not their decision. That's the decision of the
people who are who are who are not employing
them, right, who are rejecting them from these areas.
And on top of that, you've got more general
social pressures and, and gender expectations and things like
that. But I think just purely on employment, discrimination
against women is substantial, and that contributes to the,
to the gender pay gap.
And even in the book, when, uh, at a
certain point, if I remember correctly, when you talk
about or address uh differences in personality, even if
it's true that women are on average more agreeable
than men, I mean, uh, and but that apparently
would have some influence in terms of Uh, income,
but, but I mean, you, I, I think that
at a certain point you mentioned that in cases
where women are disagreeable or a little bit more
disagreeable than people are expecting them to be, then
they are penalized for that.
Right. Yeah, so being disagreeable I think leads. To
pay rises on average, cos you're like, no, you
know, give me more money, um, I don't have
any experience with that. I'm quite agreeable, so I,
I don't, I've never asked anyone for more money.
I'm always too scared, but, but if I did,
as a man, I'd probably be rewarded for it,
whereas for women, they're they're less likely to be
rewarded and that's exactly what this paper shows, right?
It's like. They have agreeableness for men and agreeableness
for women, and it shows, yeah, there is a
gain for men, but there isn't one for women,
right, and that speaks to this kind of, this,
this bind that women are in, right, because it's
like. Men do better, men are treated better, and
men behave a certain way. But if you try
to behave like men, you won't necessarily be rewarded
for it, and in fact you might be punished
for it. I mean, there's other things like this,
there's like the competence likability trade-off, right, so men
are allowed to be competent and likable, right? You
could be like a really successful man and everyone's
like, oh yeah, you know, I respect him, he's
a good guy. If you're a really successful woman.
People, people are likely, people are less likely to,
to like you, right? They, they think that you're
not very likable. You get all these sayings like,
oh, you know, she's um I don't know if
you in the UK we say like a battle
ax or something, you say like uh or like
girl boss or I don't know, you just get
all of these sayings for like, you're, you know,
you're you're just because you're harsh for a woman.
To be successful, nobody likes you anymore, and and
and and you know that all of these binds,
there are so many binds for women in the
workplace, so many things they have to deal with,
and it's not enough for Jordan Peterson to say,
oh, you know, be more disagreeable, you'll get a,
you'll get a um a pay rise. I mean,
case in point, that interview, Cathy Newman was being
pretty disagreeable and uh I'm pretty sure that later
on he called her a possessed witch or something.
It's like. Would you say that about a man,
Jordan? I don't think so. So, you know, he's
just demonstrating that point succinctly.
Yeah, right. So I, I want to ask you
now about some of the crises that people have
been experiencing in experiencing in the, in recent years,
like the housing crisis, inflation, the cost of living
crisis. But, uh, I mean, before we talk about
housing itself in the book, you tell us about
the importance of land. I mean, why is land
important and in what ways does that link them
to housing?
That's It it's the worst kept secret of the
housing debate that it's actually about land, right, and
I think land has, Land is, is, is fun
it's almost unimaginably fundamental because it's, it's probably the,
the clearest need we have in that you actually
can't exist if you're not on land, right, we
have to, we have to be on land somewhere.
So it really matters who owns that land, what
right what rights we have to it, how we're
allowed to interact with it, how it's balanced with
the needs of others and so on. And so
you've got that fact that, you know, we absolutely
fundamentally cannot do without land. We can do without
food more than we can do without land, right?
Plus you've got the fact that it's supply is
basically fixed, you can't really create land like that.
I mean there's some attempts, but um it really.
There is a certain amount of land on the
world and there's not gonna be any more. And
especially if you're talking about specific locations, each location
is unique. So whoever owns that land is gonna
have like some kind of monopoly power. Uh, WE
really need them and we can't create more, right?
So this is, this is what makes land what
I call the ultimate monopoly, right, the mother, the
mother of all monopolies, I think Winston Churchill called
it. And we've chosen to pursue this private model
in most capitalist countries one way or another. I
think even more in in English speaking countries, we've
chosen this kind of private model and people privately,
privately own the land and you have to buy
it uh to get access to it, and often
it's not really, it's not really counterbalanced with the
needs of the community, and that has led to
a lot, a lot of problems.
Uh, SO, and in the book you also talk
about land taxes. I mean, what are land taxes
and what benefits uh could we get from them?
So, With things like house prices, right, when you
estimate the value of the land and the value
of of the housing separately, it's clear that when
house prices rise year on year, as they do
relentlessly in the UK as well as, as well
as across the globe, really, um. It's actually the
value of the land rising, and the reason for
that is that basically if you think about a
house. The actual physical house, if anything, it's depreciating,
right? It's, it's, you know, it's gonna need work
done over the years, um, it's gonna become older
and it might need stru like proper structural, uh,
not reforms, um, but anyway, structural changes at some
point, right? So the house is, is. Deteriorating and
you can see that it's the value of the
land that matters because suppose, you know, something happens,
a new employer opens up nearby. What happens to
house prices in that area, they go up, a
new transport link opens. House prices in that area
go up. I don't know, someone important, someone famous
moves in nearby, house prices go up, nothing's changed
about the house, it's the land or another way
of thinking about it is the location, right? It's
like where you are, what's available to you, right,
and that. And that just increases, right? And Winston
Churchill again, um, I don't like the man, but
he could turn a phrase, but he said, look,
every single one of these improvements to utilities, to
transport, to the broader economy, the landlord doesn't affect
any of them. He sleeps and yet he yields
the benefits as rents go up, right? And so
therefore what land tax does is it tries to
capture these economic rents, and economic rents are generally
thought of as something which is like unearned, it's
an unearned increment, it's not. It's not created by
the person who receives it, right? And that's just,
you know, your landlord just happily sitting on all
this land while the area's up and coming and,
and everything's going well and his rents, rents go
up, he hasn't done anything. He hasn't done anything,
he hasn't necessarily invested, it could be the same
house with with no investment, right? So, so that,
try to capture that just by taxing the value
of the land. Uh, THIS is what land tax
tries to do, and I think it has a
number of benefits. Number one. Generally speaking, you can
say that landlords are richer than non-landlords. I think
uh that's a pretty safe statement to make. So
it's redistributive if you tax land and give it
back to to the people. Uh, SO there's a,
you know, there's a basic political case for it,
uh, you know, redistributing the wealth and all that.
But there's also some more interesting effects of land
taxes because it's pretty much the only tax, I
think that may encourage rather than discourage economic activity.
So because you are taxing land, no matter what
they do with it, the land is pre-existing, right?
Um, AND they're sitting on it. If you tax
it, you kind of light a fire under their
feet and you make them invest because they need
to make the money back, right? Or sell it
to somebody who, who will. And so there are
these really interesting studies of land tax that show
actually it can kind of bring investment forward, right?
Unlike other taxes which tend to discourage investment, it
can bring investment forward. Right, and then you just,
uh, you actually end up with more with more
growth, more investment in buildings and, you know, less
land banking, you know, nobody just can just sit
on their land and not do anything with it.
So I think it's a really interesting tax cos
it it has the rare benefit of being kind
of morally just, um. And raising revenue, but also
probably being good on a pure on a purely,
you know, purely economic basis, on an efficiency basis,
and most economists from across traditions have agreed on
that. I think Milton Friedman said it, I think
Robert Solo said it, I think uh and obviously
Henry George and the Georgist uh love love to.
Love to sound this, this alarm about land value
taxes.
Yeah, uh, but I mean, what is then the
housing crisis and what led to it? I, I,
for example, I live in Portugal and people have
talked a lot about the government having allowed many
rich foreign people to buy, um, uh, to buy
houses here to, to. Uh, AND, and then also,
I mean, many, uh, accommodations being used for tourism
and stuff like that. So, I mean, people have
been talking a lot about that here and in
rent prices and house prices have been going up
and up and up and here in Portugal, for
example, rent prices are still going up and uh
we have a minimum wage of 870 a month.
And in Lisbon, for example, the capital, you can't
really rent a one bedroom apartment right now with
less than 1000 something euros. So it's basically impossible
to live in, in Lisbon for people who were
minimum minimum wage. So, I mean, but what led
to all of this? Really.
I think there are, there are so many factors.
I mean, you mentioned the the super rich, right,
I do think that there's this problem. With pursuing
this private ownership model, that housing becomes an asset,
right, um, housing is an investment, it's a speculative
investment. It's also quite a sure thing because house
prices just do seem to rise relentlessly. So compared
to even the stock market, right, it's quite a
good investment to make if you're a rich person,
if you're looking for some kind of return. And
so you just get people buying up houses, you
get people buying up houses, people with more money
than you, people who have collateral of various kinds
who can, who can take on more debt than
the average potential buyer, especially someone like a, a,
you know, a first time buyer, let alone somebody
who's on minimum wage. So you get that kind
of spiral, and you also get the banks buying
into this because they're willing to make these mortgages,
er lend out these mortgages, and the rules around
that have been relaxed over, over the decades. And
they, they make these, uh, they, they lend this
money and then the, the price of the house
goes up, and that appears on their asset sheet,
so it's good for them as well. And you
just get this cycle, right, of like people with
the money, people who can borrow the money, investing
in in housing, using it purely as an asset,
making a return, hoping the price increases. Um, AND
then, you know, they sell it and they move
on to their next one. So you have this
massive schism opening up between the relatively, you know,
wealthy and those who have access to capital, right?
And, and the rest of us who actually might
need to use the house as a house. So
that that's one thing, right? Um, I also think
you've got this issue as well, which we have,
I think, you know, you guys have got it
in Portugal with Lisbon. um WE have it in
the UK arguably even worse, but. There there's not
much economic opportunity outside of some of the major
cities. Um, AND this is something that Germany does
relatively better, but again, but like, you know, yeah,
you can move out of London, you could, I
could go and buy a house for like 100,000
pounds somewhere in the UK, right, which is not
that much, right? But there wouldn't be anything there,
there wouldn't be any employment. Right, there wouldn't be
any transport links, there wouldn't be any sort of
cul culture, entertainment, etc. YOU know, and there wouldn't
be any other people, let alone people I know.
So we've got this very, I think we just
allowed um our economies to become too concentrated on
the cities, which means there are too. People moving
there, right, relative to other, other areas and housing,
can't keep up. um, BUT the other areas are
actually very cheap, but the problem is nobody wants
to live there. So I think we need a
more fundamental rebalancing, as well as tackling the very
wealthy, we need to tackle kind of regional inequality.
As well, so, um, and then there's, I mean,
I don't know, there's 100 things that contribute to
this. I could go on about them for ages.
OK, so let me ask you a different kind
of question. What what alternatives are there to privately
owned housing because this is something that people, particularly
in the west, I think, cannot get, uh, out
of their minds that the housing has to be
privately owned, so.
In the UK in, in the 70s, I think
that um 1 in 5 people in the top
income quintile lived in social housing, right? Uh SOMETHING
like that. Quite a few quite a few people
who were pretty well off were living in social
housing. It was much more commonly accepted, it was
much more widely available. There was less of a
social stigma, and I do think we need to
bring that back. There are lots of countries which
do invest more in social housing, and they could
do it in different ways. In Finland, it's like,
uh, we will give you a house, right? It's
literally like that, it's like that straightforward, we'll give
you a house. In France, there's more um it's,
it's still private developers often, but they're required to
provide 20, 25% of um. Of their housing that
they build is supposed to be affordable, sorry, that's
specifically in in Paris, I think, not, not the
whole of France, right, and that's been really successful.
Um, ANOTHER approach entirely is these kind of more
communal ones like community land trusts, housing co-ops, those
are growing and I think they're they're present in
the USA in some states in the USA have
more communal approaches to housing. Switzerland has a lot
of housing co-ops. I think the stat is 11
in 10. Uh, PEOPLE lives in a housing co
op in Switzerland, Geneva, sorry, in Geneva specifically. So,
you know, there are, there are all of these
different approaches, which one works, you know, which one
works in, in is is a country by country
or even a city by city matter, but my
number one policy would just be to provide more
social housing because I think publicly provide more social
housing and housing, you know, giving. Well, not, not
giving, but uh, you know, providing housing to to
people who are homeless as well. I think that's
absolutely fundamental. So that, again, it's similar with UBI
it's like everybody has this baseline, right? It's like,
it's there if you need it, you've got this
baseline, this public option, you know, your, your needs
are taken care of. If you want to buy
a massive private house, fine, whatever, but like there's
nobody's gonna fall below this line. This is the
fundamental thing that I think we need with our
economy, like nobody can fall below a certain standard
of living. Ever, no matter what happens.
Yeah. So another thing that people all over the
world have been experiencing recently has to do with
inflation. So what causes inflation, really?
That's a really good. I think there's there's, there's
no one thing that causes inflation, right? And I
think there are different types of inflation. So, you
know, in, in economics 101 class, you'll get the
cost push uh and demand pool, right? And uh
so you know, if costs increase in prices increase,
kind of, obviously almost tautologically, right? But also, if
there's high demand for certain things, then prices will
increase. Um AND I think. With the, with the
recent cost of living crisis, it was mostly cost
push. We had this like clearly supply chains weren't
working. We had um the Russia invading Ukraine, energy
prices went way up. We had all of these
specific industries which were where costs uh rose massively
and that just led to a to an increase
in in prices as the global economy struggled to,
to, you know, to sort itself out. Uh, NOW.
What's interesting I think is that inflation can. Shift
from being a sort of, you know, this price
is increasing, this price is falling, uh to a
sort of generalized. Wage price spiral, right, and that
that's the danger, that's what people were worried about
in 2022, 23. And um people were worried about,
yeah, so like uh workers and and unions in
particular might demand higher wages, then corporations increase their
prices to maintain profits, and then workers say, wait
a minute, our wages aren't worth as much anymore
cos you've increased prices. Let's go again and again
and again into this spiral, right? And that's something
that I think is the worry with with um
inflation when there are periods of inflation, is it
going to spiral, is it going to become endemic
to the economy? And that's the thing that we,
I don't think we really know how to manage
that, and I, I hate to keep referencing Germany,
but they do have a situation where uh unions
are on the boards of centrally set um. That
that set wages centrally, right, and the unions are
there and the businesses there and the governments are
there and other representatives of civil society are there,
and they all sort of come to an agreement.
I think that's the kind of model we want
to pursue to stop a wage price spiral, um,
but we also need, you know, really big changes
to the global economy, I think. Post-K Keynesians have
long emphasized the. There, there, there are things which
are really fundamental right, we saw this with energy
and and Russia, Ukraine, there are things which are
really fundamental. We need to have ways to monitor
and manage these key sectors which if they go
wrong, can threaten to bring everything down with them
and can be passed through. To other prices as
well, right? Energy is probably the the best example
of this you can think of. So I think
we need far, far more um active institutions that
are monitoring and managing inflation, wage price spirals, uh,
as well as like specific uh key sectors. And
just really so, so that we know what's going
on with prices because right now we've just got
this kind of interest rate management by central banks,
which is, it's a very blunt tool. What you're
doing basically is you're reducing demand by increasing mortgage
costs for people at the at the at the.
Base of it, that's actually what you're doing. So
you're kind of treating inflation like it's demand pool,
when actually I think it's recently it's been cost
push and potentially wage price spiral, but um, anyway,
that was a long and big rambling answer to
what you said.
No, and also related to something that you mentioned
there in the book, you talk about the movement
of goods, supply chains, and how the global economy
can break. So what are the things that make
our global economy vulnerable in particular kinds of circumstances?
We didn't realize how fragile our supply chains were
before the pandemic, and I, you know, I didn't
realize. Nobody realized it was like 2008, right, no
economists saw it coming. I don't think most economists
even study the supply chain, I don't think they
really understood it. There was one guy called Barry
C. Lynn, um, who warned in 2007. And he
made a really prescient quote where he said, look,
it's great, yeah, we've got like trade now, we've
got all this stuff, all this amazing, you know,
uh, cheap stuff and technologies, blah blah blah. But
it's pretty fragile, you know, there are, there are
companies, there there are cases where there's only one
company in the world that produces something, so there
was um the um the Japanese company, I think
they're called Merck, they produce Zirillik, which is like
a kind of. Uh, PAINT for cars, it's, it
gives it a kind of blackish tint, um, there
are a lot of cars that have that they
kind of shimmer, right, um, but it was only
them, it's this one company in Japan that produces
it, and I think, I think it was the
um. God, what was it? I think was there
with the uh with the earthquake in 2011 when
suddenly they had to halt production, and then there
was no irrelik anywhere, right, just because that one
company had gone into crisis. Now of course it's
a pain, it doesn't matter that much, but it
does matter, and it did matter when it was
things like oil and gas, which we depended on
Russia too much for, when it was things like
microchips, where we depend on Taiwan and particularly uh
one Taiwanese company for um. The TMSC um and.
And um you know, and. PPE equipment which had
to be um which had to be funneled through
a port in China, uh Jinghoo, I can't I'm
probably pronouncing it wrong but they the you know,
all of these things that are so crucial to
our way of way of life, one way or
another. They're really either they're only produced really in
one place or they have to pass through one
place. And what we don't have in the economy
is this resilience, right? We don't have resilience. And,
and 11 point I make in the book, I,
I compare it to the human body, cause we've
got like 2 kidneys, right? Now that's probably a
bit too much in the sense that we don't
really need to use all of them all of
the time. But if you only had one kidney
and it got an infection or you know, um,
you had to have it removed or something, well
then you'd die, right? So we have to as
partly as insurance and this is, this notion of
resilience, it's kind of like insurance. We don't have
any insurance in the global economy. It's like we
just depended on everything. To keep running the way
it was with, you know, key industries expected to
do all of the heavy lifting. And another point
I want to make about this is the workers,
again, and these are, these are a type of
essential worker. You've got drivers, things like um truck
drivers, right, who are just literally. Waiting in queues
for hours, and the, because the deliveries aren't properly
coordinated, and so you're not sure if the ship's
gonna come, if if there's gonna be, you know,
if they're gonna be any goods for you to
deliver, and so you're just waiting and you're being
flexible where the rest of the system is is
basically quite unpredictable, right, and they're, they're kind of
the buffer. The these drivers waiting in the queues,
they're literally the buffer, and we're just depending on
them and they're obviously, as you might expect, poorly
paid, um, you know, don't have healthcare, and it's
like, you know, you can't, you know, you might
like wet yourself in the queue. We're talking about
hours, hours, hours in the queue, unpaid, might not
get work and that kind of, you know. Put
pushing all of the flexibility we need onto these
workers is to me fundamentally unacceptable, you know, from
a, from an obvious human standpoint, but also it's
just bad, it's just bad for for the system.
You need a system that actually works, that is
properly coordinated where. There are, there is resilience and
robustness in the supply chains. Things don't just come
from one area. Everybody in the logistics chain knows
what's going to happen. Everybody in the logistics chain
is properly remunerated, has a stable job, right? And
that's just going to produce a system that is
itself much more stable and isn't dependent on, you
know, exploitation and pushing efficiency to the max at
the expense of every other goal.
So for us to have a more resilient system
in the book, you talk about redundancy and compartmentalization.
So tell us about that. What does each of
those things mean?
So redundancy um is is about having nodes in
a network that you don't need at any one
time. So uh your second kidney is partially redundant,
right? That's that's that example. Um, COMPARTMENTALIZATION is like
if one part fails, then the next one. That
then other parts don't. Now again, with kidneys, showing
up my lack of medical knowledge here, but with
kidney, if one, if you get one removed, you
don't necessarily need to get the other one removed,
right? So that's, we've got compartmentalization and redundancy in
our kidneys, right, you can see it there. Um,
YEAH, another example is the internet. Right, so the
internet, there's no like internet, right, there's not like
a building that's like this is the internet. The
internet's everywhere, it's all of our routers, my router
goes down. My neighbour's router doesn't go down, right?
We've got, and there's, you know, there are different
ways to connect up the internet if some wires
over there go down, uh, it's not like the
entire area goes out, there are ways to reroute.
So again, we have compartmentalization and redundancy in the
internet. Every engineer knows that you need these things,
right? You need like resilience because parts of the
system will fail. And that's just, well they might
need to be repaired, you know, temporarily uh taken
down and so on. That's just what happens with
any system, but we've been pretending that that's not
gonna happen with the uh global economic system. And
I think what we've seen recently, I mean let's
talk, let's pretend we're still in October when I
finish writing the book. What we've seen is um.
A lot of investment from countries from the USA
to China to India to the EU er into
this kind of redundancy and compartmentalization to say, yeah,
look, we're gonna have microchip factories in the USA
right? Uh, NOW, they may not be as good
as the ones in Taiwan or in the Netherlands
because those are at the absolute top of the
game, you know, they're like going for 2 nanometer
chips or whatever. They're, they're really, really highly efficient,
highly technologically advanced. No, it's not the case that
you need to compete with them on a level
footing. What you need is to be able to
say, OK, suppose something like the supply chain crisis
happens again, which by the way, now it's looking
like it might because of Trump, um, you have.
Access to, they're not quite as good, they're not
quite as efficient, but they're there, you still have
microchips, right? And so you can survive, you can
get by, right, and just cos Taiwan goes down,
it doesn't mean microchip production in the US goes
down, right? So, so that's something that I think,
I think we have pursued across, across the globe,
based on the lessons of the supply chain crisis,
whether we've pursued it enough, whether it will be.
Established yet, uh, when it's subjected to the next
test, which seems to be sooner rather than later,
that remains to be seen.
OK, so let me get into the last topic
that I want to cover with you today. Um,
I mean, let's talk a little bit more about
solutions. Of course, you've already mentioned some of them
and we went through some of them when it
comes to housing, for example. But what would be
general solutions to the problems that we covered here
today? I mean, in what ways should the economic
systems be fixed?
We started by talking about the separation of the
economy from the rest of society and from politics
and from thinking about it as a separate sphere.
I would say that the overarching argument in this
book is that we shouldn't think about it that
way. Um, IT'S that we should actually bring it
under more democratic control, right? And so there's this
idea of demos, um, from ancient Greece, where like
people participate much more in the decisions that affect
them, where they're not subject to the tyranny of
the state, but also not subject to the tyranny
of the market. And so you're kind of freeing
people up. UBI is one way of doing this,
like freeing them from the tyranny of the market,
right? Also things like worker democracy, uh, the kinds
of systems they have in Germany, that direct control,
uh, things like community land trusts, which we discussed.
There are people pursuing these kind of land back
movements, you know, taking land in B. THERE'S these
organizations that take land and take housing, um, that
isn't being used under the Brazilian constitution, which says
that land should have a social purpose. All of
these efforts for me and as again, also reining
in billionaires, right? They're all about bringing things fundamentally
under our control, right? And not allowing the market
to dominate, not allowing the state to dominate, and
not allowing any one individual to dominate whether they're
a politician or a billionaire or both, as the
case may be. Uh, SO I, I really think
that this idea of demos and just bringing the
economy back under the control of the people is
the fundamental. Solution to, to, to these problems because
we don't need to like appease the economy. We
don't need to treat it as something that we
like can't control, that can't work for us. We
don't need to sacrifice ourselves on the altar of
the economy, you know, pursue austerity because it's good
for the economy, even though it's bad for people.
No, that doesn't work. Um, WHAT'S good for people
is often good for the economy, but really we're,
you know it sounds a bit cheesy, but we
need to put people first, right? And I think
Demos is the route to do that.
So tell us just a little bit more and
I think this will be my last question about
possible democratic forms of ownership because particularly when it
comes to, for example, companies, people uh have been
used for a long time to this sort of
hierarchical for. OF ownership where, I mean, common workers
don't really have much of a saying in how
the companies are run. Uh, BUT, uh, what, in
what ways can we sort of organize our labor,
our companies in more democratic ways?
It's, it's really incredible to me, um, I think,
I think this is a good selling point for,
for people who are more progressive as well, because
most people who work, um, in a sort of
standard job feel that, you know, they know their
job really well, they know what goes on, and
they probably know it better than their boss, and
they probably feel like they aren't remunerated enough and
all the rest of it. And yet they won't
have a say in the decisions about, about their
job, about what they do. They get told what
to do, they can probably think of a better
way to do it. They can probably think of,
you know, decisions that they'd like to be a
part of in the company. And so, yeah, this
idea of like worker democracy for me is really
fundamental. I think that workers know the most about
their situation. I think that they have access to
better information, more on the ground information. Uh WHAT
James C. Scott, the anarchist called Metis. Which is
like just knowledge of the job, right, like the,
like can't be put into a contract that can't
be written down. So like one of the good
examples of Metis is the work to rule strike,
which I think is French, um, but yeah, the,
the work to rule strike where you like, what
they. DO is just follow the rulebook. I think
taxi drivers in France pioneered it. Uh, THEY just
follow the rules, and obviously everything grinds to a
screeching halt because there are so many little things
that they do that are outside the rules that
the top down rules can't know about, that the
boss can't necessarily know about um the. That actually
make things tick over. And that's kind of what's
happening with the supply chain as well, when I
talked about these exploited workers, right, they're making it
work on the ground. And those should be the
people that are running the businesses that are running
the corporations, right, that have a say in other
political decisions. So I really think it's, it's something
which will be very intrinsically good. I think people
who, you know, participating in the decisions that affect
you, I think is very good for people. I
think people like to do it. People like to
have a say, they don't like to be sidelined.
So it's a good in itself, but I just
think it will lead to better outcomes as well.
I think if people have a say, you're going
to look at companies being, being run, run much
better. Um AND so that's, that's, you know, worker
democracy is really fundamental to me. I think it's
a really good thing. And as far as I
can see, and I've reviewed all of the literature
on this. There is basically no evidence for it
producing worse outcomes on almost any metric. It's good
for equality within the firm, um, it's good for
like productivity, it's good for firm survival rates. It
it really is just a win-win, except for the
bosses, of course.
Yeah, sure. So, I mean, is there any other
message that you would have coming from your book?
Anything else you would like to tell us,
or? Uh, IF I may, I'd like to reflect
on what's happened since uh he's finished writing it
because it's like I said, it was October, right?
So obviously a lot has changed since then. Now,
one thing that's really interesting, so we didn't actually
mention this, but I, I talked to, I talk
about two things. The books split into two parts,
right? The economy is uneven and the economy is
dysfunctional. So the first stuff we discussed with um
billionaires, social mobility, essential workers, that's about the economy
being uneven, the inequalities that manifest in various ways
and have a negative impact on, on most of
us. Um, THEN you've got the dysfunctions, the housing
sector, the way we manage inflation, um, the supply
chain crisis, parts of the economy that just don't
work. And you've also got this debate surrounding the
new optimists and whether there are gains in certain
metrics versus others, right? Now what didn't occur to
me when writing the book, and I wish I'd
put this in because I would have seemed like
prescient, um, but evidently I'm not that prescient. The,
the parts of the economy that uh sorry, an
uneven economy leads to a dysfunctional economy, right? So
having these inequalities, right, that leave communities left behind
that lead to political backlash, which um and which
allow billionaires to take advantage of this backlash, they
endanger some of the good parts of the the
economy and they make the economy more dysfunctional. So
if you see something like Trump and Musk, right?
You see, I, I talk about Musk at length
in the billionaires chapter, I say he's taken control
of so many different areas of life from, Uh,
from Tesla to the boring company, to media, to
Starlink and SpaceX, he's he's taken control. Now what
he's literally done now is insert himself into the
US government, and he's tried to cut a lot
of these programs that have benefited people across the
world. They tried to cut off like a special
type of peanut butter. That is given to impoverished
children, mostly in sub-Saharan Africa. There were warehouses full
of it, I think in in New York and
they weren't allowing them to send them. Eventually I
think a court order made them do it, thankfully,
but they've been trying to cut this off, they're
targeting Social Security, they're targeting the Department of Education,
right? So this uneven economy, it, it endangers. Uh,
THE rest of the economy, it makes the rest
of the economy dysfunctional. The bad parts of our
economy endanger the gains that we have made over
the past few decades, and that for me is
a real, real risk, and I think we're seeing
it played out just so explicitly and vividly, and
I think it is, we have no choice but
to rein in, um, these, these inequalities, otherwise everything
else will be endangered as well.
Great. So the book is again why we're Getting
Poorer A Realist's Guide to the Economy and how
we can fix it. Of course, I'm leaving a
link to it in the description box down below
and also to your amazing channel and learning economics
anywhere else, people can find you on the internet.
Uh, I'm now on TikTok and Instagram. I've been
doing some shorts, so you can find me, find
me on there. I've got a few videos and
more to come.
OK, great. So, look, it's been really fun to
talk with you. It's been an honor to have
you on the show. As I said, I've been
a big fan of your channel for a long
time. And if you would be open to it,
it would also be a great pleasure to potentially
somewhere in the future have you back. To talk
perhaps some of the topics we left out here
today. And from, uh, it would also be nice
to talk about Trump's tariffs and those sorts of
things. So,
yeah, yeah, yeah, we, we, we covered a lot.
We did cover a lot. It was impressive, but
we didn't do everything, so I'd I'd love to
come back.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes calling in Holbrook
field governor Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre Francis Forti Agnseroro
and Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Labray and Samuel Corriere,
Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David
Sloan Wilson, asilla dearraujuru and Roach Diego Londono Correa.
Yannick Punter Darusmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale
back medicine, Gary Galman Sam of Zallirianeioltonin John Barboza,
Julian Price, Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fre Franca
Bartolotti Gabrielon Scorteseus Slelitsky, Scott Zachary Fitim Duffyani Smith
John Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke
Lovai Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wozin, David Williams,
Diocosta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old
Erringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassyigoren, Jeff
McMann, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner,
Luke Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert, Jessica
Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis,
Valentin Steinman, Perrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam
Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula
Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff, Sean Nelson, Mike Levin,
and Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers.
These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden,
Bernardin Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and
Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick
Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio
Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.